Updated metadata documentation part 1 - introduction (#1846)
metoppv/improver: doc/source/metadata/Introduction.rst

    the nominal data time or start time of a model forecast run.
    However, as IMPROVER generates a blend from multiple sources
    with different start times, there is no unique data time,
    so the use of ``blend_time`` is more appropriate.

forecast_period
    This usually represent the interval between the ``forecast_reference_time``
    and the validity time (``time``), but as stated above,
    there is no unique ``forecast_reference_time``, and forecasts valid at
    different times may have a different ``blend_time``, so at best
    ``forecast_period`` is unhelpful, at worst it is confusing.

The time coordinate variables share a common set of attributes:

standard_name / long_name
    A descriptive name, either from the `CF Standard Name`_ list 
    (e.g. ``time``) or  
    a non-standard ``long_name`` (e.g. ``blend_time``)

units
    Units of measure for the quantity.
    As these are usually in seconds relative to midnight on 1st January 1970,
    so usually some formatting is required to be human-readable. 

calendar
    Indicates that a Gregorian (standard) calendar is used. 

bounds
    Just a pointer to the variable defining the start and end of the time period,

>     if it is present. 

Reviewer: I think that this could be shortened by writing:
```suggestion
   Pointer to the variable defining the start and end of the time period, if it is present. 
```
however this is only personal preference so I am happy if you prefer to leave it as is. If it is changed, there are a few other instances of sentences beginning "Just a..." which should also be changed.

Author: Done - in fact I shortened it slightly further.

Horizontal coordinate variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Two horizontal coordinate variables, 
here projection_y_coordinate and projection_x_coordinate
(but would be latitude and longitude for an equirectangular 
projection grid, such as the Met Office global domain),
provide the coordinates of the grid points at the centre of the grid cell,
with two further variables defining the cell bounds.

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 28-39

The horizontal coordinates variables share a common set of attributes:

standard_name
    A descriptive name from the `CF Standard Name`_ list.

units
    The units of measure for the quantity, these will always be SI units,
    with the exception that degrees are used in preference to radians

axis
    Indicates whether the coordinate should be regarded as an “X” or “Y” 
    Cartesian coordinate.  

bounds

>     Just a pointer to the variable defining the edges of the grid cells 

Reviewer: See previous comment on sentences starting with "Just a..."

Author: Also changed.

***********
The example explored so far in the document describes the metadata
for probabilities of exceeding a threshold, 
but IMPROVER can also generate forecasts as a set of percentiles, 
for which the metadata will differ slightly. 
These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

Dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^

The ``threshold`` dimension is replaced by ``percentile`` dimension

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_perc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 2-6
    :emphasize-lines: 2
 
percentile
    The dimension for the coordinate describing the percentile values. 

Main percentile variable 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the example here, the main variable is a 12 hour maximum temperature,
but representing the Nth percentile of the temperature forecast probability distribution
at each point. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_perc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 8-14

The variable attributes are the same as the probability example
previously described in detail, except: 

standard_name
    Can be used rather than a ``long_name``, as ``air_temperature``
    exists as a descriptive name in the `CF Standard Name`_ list. 

cell_methods

>     Used to describe statistical processing applied to the quantity

Reviewer: I think this needs re-wording. Would the following suggestion work?

```suggestion
Used to describe statistical post-processing applied to the quantity. Cell methods no longer require the additional non-standardized part, ''(comment: of air_temperature)'', as they now refer to the main variable that is a maximum temperature over 12 hours.
```

Author: I think I've updated this as suggested.

    no longer requires the additional non-standardized part, 
    ``(comment: of air_temperature)``, 

>     as they now refer to the main variable that is a maximum temperature over 12 hours. 

Reviewer: I think this needs re-wording. Would the following suggestion work?

```suggestion
Used to describe statistical post-processing applied to the quantity. Cell methods no longer require the additional non-standardized part, ''(comment: of air_temperature)'', as they now refer to the main variable that is a maximum temperature over 12 hours.
```

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_perc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 24-26, 72-74

The variable attributes are:

long_name
   ``percentile`` which is used for all IMPROVER percentile variables. 
   It is not in the `CF Standard Name`_ list.

units
    The units here are a percentage. 

Spot data 
*********

Broadly, the spot data parallels the form of the gridded data, 
both probabilities and percentiles are produced,
but there are some notable differences because of the nature of the data.
These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

Global attributes 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Only the title is different for the spot data. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 60-66
    :emphasize-lines: 6

Dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^

The dimensions for the horizontal coordinate variables have been replaced by
a dimension for an index coordinate for the sites, 
and a dimension for the WMO identifier string length has been added. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 2-7

spot_index
    The dimension for the index for the set of sites. 

string5 / string8

>     Just constants used to dimension the character length of the string variable

Reviewer: See previous comments on starting sentence with "Just..."

Author: And also changed.

The principles applied to the metadata witin IMPROVER are: 

 * Conformance to the CF Metadata Conventions, building on this where necessary
 * Clear purpose, with just enough metadata to describe the data sufficiently
 * Nothing misleading or unnecessarily restrictive for wide usage
 * (Ideally) support for referencing more detailed external documentation

Looking at an example
---------------------

The easiest way to explain the IMPROVER metadata from a user perspective
is to dive straight in and look at an actual example of the metadata.
For this purpose, we will consider
gridded probabilities for a 12-hour maximum temperature 
exceeding a range of thresholds
on an extended UK domain generated from Met Office model data. 

There are two common views of the metadata:

* How the ncdump utility would display the netCDF file metadata 
* How iris would display the cube

We will mainly focus on the file view as here as the default output
provides a fuller view
(although iris can be used to fully explore the metadata).

Note that to aid readability, in both cases
``probability_of_air_temperature_above_threshold`` 
has been shortened to ``prob_temp12m``

> and for the ncdump output trailing semicolons have also been removed

Author: This was mainly done to fit this on a page - originally this was in a Word document. I maintained it to avoid scroll bars on the code snippets, but agree that a more pure approach is to show people what they would actually see when invoking an ncdump command, so I'll revert these to pure copies of the ncdump files (including semicolons, full titles and without artificial formatting or line breaks).

and the text for the global attribute

> ``mosg__model_run`` has line breaks inserted.

Author: I've removed the line breaks, as they are artificial. It means that you get a single line of text that goes off the viewing area, but it's what you'd actually see and being at the bottom of the file, the scroll bar is close at hand!

Full ncdump of netCDF file metadata
***********************************

Using the command ``ncdump -v threshold filename`` 
will yield the following output for our sample file.

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :linenos:
    :tab-width: 4

Full iris listing of cube metadata
**********************************

Using the python command ``print(cube)`` will yield the following output
for our sample file.

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_irisprint.txt
    :linenos:
    :tab-width: 4

Global attributes
-----------------

These provide the general information about the file contents
(although they actually appear at the end of the ncdump output).

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 66-79

>     :emphasize-lines: 2, 12-14

Author: I agree, that's much better. I've changed it to "friendly"

The four highlighted attributes are part of the `CF Metadata Conventions`_:

Conventions
    Indicates conformance to version of the `CF Metadata Conventions`_
    (determined by the version of iris, used to write the data). 

institution
    Where the original data was produced.

source
    Method of production of the original data.
    For the model data feeding into this
    in this example, this will be “Met Office Unified Model”, 
    but as IMPROVER applies significant processing of multiple inputs,
    the output of IMPROVER can be considered as original data. 

title
    Succinct description of what is in the file.
    A specific model is specified where data is from a single model 
    and no significant post-processing has been applied. 

The other two attributes are specific to IMPROVER,
originally used in separate Met Office process to 'standardise'

> the model output, which is why they are prefixed by ``mosg__``. 

Author: 1. I do mean StaGE, and I added this in to try to explain the rather standard structure of the attribute names, but if it's confusing then it's better removed. Done.
2. I've included a paraphrased version of what you've said below the attribute description.

   * ``gl`` = global model
   * ``uk`` = high-resolution UK domain model
   * ``nc`` = (extrapolation-based) nowcast

   with a secondary component indicating whether the 
   source is deterministic (``det``) or an ensemble (``ens``).
   
   For example, ``uk_ens`` indicates our UK ensemble model,
   MOGREPS-UK.

mosg__model_run
   This attribute extends the information provided by
   ``mosg__model_configuration``, to detail the contribution 
   blend of specific model runs(or cycles). 
   More recently, this has been extended to include the weight
   given to this contribution in the blend.
   This is represented as a list of space-separated composite entries
   of the form:

   ``model identifier:cycle time in format yyyymmddTHHMMZ:weight\n``

Dimensions
----------

These do what the name suggests and provide the name and extent
of the dimensions for the variable arrays. 
In this example, three of these are the dimensions of coordinate variables
and the last is a more general dimension. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 2-6

projection_y_coordinate
    Number of points in the horizontal x-direction

projection_x_coordinate

>     Number of points in the horizontal y-direction. 

Author: I think it's a bit more subtle than this. Coordinate variables can be flagged as being horizontal with axis = "X"/"Y" (which we do) and vertical with  axis = "Z" (which we don't do), but can be called anything. These are usually given sensible variable names and the dimensions should have the same name as the coordinate variable. There are standard names for the usual coordinate variables, However, taken together, I'm not convinced that the Convention stops using confusing names if you want to! 

I may have missed your point here, so feel free to come back with specific suggestion. However, I suspect any addition should go in the coordinate variables section rather then the dimensions section.

Variables
---------

Main probability variable
*************************

In this example, the main variable is ``prob_temp12m`` 
(in the real file it would be,
``probability_of_air_temperature_above_threshold``).
This represents the probability of the 12-hour maximum temperature
exceeding a set of thresholds.
It has 3 dimensions and 5 attributes that describe the meteorological quantity
and its relationship to other variables in the metadata.

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 8-14

The variable attributes are:

least_significant_digit
    Specifies the precision that is maintained when 'bit-shaving'
    is applied to provide improved file compression.
    The example value of ``3LL`` indicated that a precision of 3 decimal places
    is preserved, i.e. values precise to the nearest 0.001
    (actually implemented as the power of 2 nearest 0.001). 

long_name
    A descriptive name that is not governed by CF.
    If a `CF Standard Name`_ exists for the quantity, 
    it will be present and the ``long_name`` will usually be omitted
    (one of these two should always be present). 

units
    the units of measurement for the quantity.

>     These will always be SI units. 

Author: Yes. Added.

    ``time: maximum`` indicates the maximum over ther period of the time bounds.
    The ``comment: of air_temperature`` in brackets
    is to clarity that it the maximum
    is not of the probability, but of the underlying quantity,
    the temperature, in this exmaple.
    Cell methods are covered in more detail in the User Guide

.. add link to User Guide

grid_mapping
    Although in this case, the name of the projection used,
    this is actually only a label pointing to separate grid mapping variable,
    which more fully describes the map projection. 

coordinates
    This lists the scalar coordinates,
    i.e. those that do not appear as dimensions of the main variable. 

Coordinate variables
********************

In this example, there 8 coordinate variables.
Three that appear as dimensions on the variable 
and 5 scalar coordinates listed in the coordinates attribute
(both highlighted in the code snippet below)

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 8-14
    :emphasize-lines: 1, 7

In summary these are:

* threshold 
* projection_y_coordinate 
* projection_x_coordinate 
* height 
* time 
* blend_time 
* forecast_period 

> * forecast_reference_time 

Author: Fair point. I think I was presenting them in an order that I considered (rather arbitrarily) to be logical (and pushing the deprecated ones to the end), but I agree it makes more sense to stick with the order in the example, so I've changed it.

.. warning::

    ``forecast_period`` and ``forecast_reference_time`` 
    are deprecated and will be dropped in the future.
    There more discussion on this in the sections below.

Probability threshold coordinate variable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the main variable in this example is a probability of exceeding a threshold, 
a further dimensional coordinate variable is required to allow the data 
to be fully interpreted.
This holds the set of thresholds for the probabilities,
which in this case are a set of 1-hour precipition accumulation values.

> Both, these are shown in the code snippets below

Author: Corrected.

    in this example, ``air_temperature``.

ssp__relative_to_threshold
    This attributes is specific to IMPROVER,
    which is why they are prefixed by ``spp__``. 
    This is intended to indicates a SPP (statistical post-processing)
    namespace to show that it is seperate from the 
    `CF Metadata Conventions`_ attributes.
    It is used to indicate the nature of the threshold inequality,
    and takes one of the four values:

    * ``greater_than`` 
    * ``greater_than_or_equal_to``
    * ``less_than`` 
    * ``less_than_or_equal_to`` 

Time coordinate variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

At present, most parameters have 2 time coordinate variables, 
``time`` and ``blend_time``, 
with a further variable providing the bounds of the time step for parameters 
where this information is required.

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 40-43, 59-64

time
    The time at which the parameter value is valid.
    As IMPROVER may blend data with different reference times 
    (used at the Met Office to generate a continually updating dataset,
    with a single value for each time),
    this is really the only piece of time information that matters

>     for most use cases. 

Author: Fair enough

.. previously, this included text the text below,
    but is this still true?
    There is one special case where blend_time is not set at present:
    wind direction – more information on this is given later. 

time_bnds
    Describes the start and end points of the time step
    (for the maximum temperature example here,
    it would represent a 12-hour period). 
    In IMPROVER (as is standard practice for meteorological parameters),
    the time is at the end of the time step defined by these bounds. 

There are two further time coordinate variables which a have been **deprecated**
and will be removed in the future:

forecast_reference_time
    This is also a `CF Standard Name`, and used to represent
    the nominal data time or start time of a model forecast run.
    However, as IMPROVER generates a blend from multiple sources
    with different start times, there is no unique data time,
    so the use of ``blend_time`` is more appropriate.

forecast_period
    This usually represent the interval between the ``forecast_reference_time``
    and the validity time (``time``), but as stated above,
    there is no unique ``forecast_reference_time``, and forecasts valid at

>     different times may have a different ``blend_time``, so at brackets

Author: Should say "at best"; corrected.

    ``forecast_period`` is unhelpful, at worst it is confusing.

The time coordinate varaibles share a common set of attributes:

standard_name / long_name
    A descriptive name, either from the `CF Standard Name`_ list 
    (e.g. ``time``) or  
    a non-standard ``long_name`` (e.g. ``blend_time``)

units
    Units of measure for the quantity.
    As these are usually in seconds relative to midnight on 1st January 1970,
    so usually some formatting is required to be human-readable. 

calendar
    Indicates that a Gregorian (standard) calendar is used. 

bounds
    Just a pointer to the variable defining the start and end of the time period,
    if it is present. 

Horizontal coordinate variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Two horizontal coordinate variables, 
here projection_y_coordinate and projection_x_coordinate
(but would be latitude and longitude for an equi-rectangular 
projection grid, such as the Met Offuce global domain),
provide the coordinates of the grid points at the centre of the grid cell,

> with teo further variables defining the cell bounds.

Author: corrected erroneous spelling of "two", as well as interesting spelling of "Office"!

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 28-39

The horizontal coordinates variables share a common set of attributes:

standard_name
    A descriptive name, either from the `CF Standard Name`_ list.

units

>     The units of measure for the quantity, these will always be SI units. 

Author: Added text to this effect.

axis
    Indicates whether the coordinate should be regarded as an “X” or “Y” 
    Cartesian coordinate.  

bounds
    Just a pointer to the variable defining the edges of the grid cells 

Vertical coordinate variable 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some parameters also have a vertical scalar coordinate, height
(in the exmaple here, it is ``1.5 m`` representing screen level): 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 55-58

It's attributes are:

standard_name
    A descriptive name, either from the `CF Standard Name`_ list.

units
    The units of measure for the quantity, these will always be SI units.  

positive

>     Indicates the direction in which values of the vertical coordinate increase. 

Author: Added in your example

units
    The units here are a percentage. 

Spot data 
*********

Broadly, the spot data parallels the form of the gridded data, 
both probabilities and percentiles are produced,
but there are some notable differences because of the nature of data.
These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

Global attributes 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Only the title is different for the spot data. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 60-73
    :emphasize-lines: 13

Dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^

The dimensions for the horizontal coordinate variables have been replaced by
a dimension for an index coordinate for the sites, 
and a dimension for the WMO identifier string length has been added. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 24-27

spot_index
    The dimension for the index for the set of sites. 

string5 / string8
    Just constants used to dimension the character length of the string variable
    holding WMO identifier and Met Office identifiers, respectively.

.. how tied to the code are these identifiers, as they may not be appropiate

>     for other users?

Author: Added in the later section on this attribute.

Variables
^^^^^^^^^

The majority of variables are the same for both gridded data and spot data.
Only the differences will be discussed here.
The variable attributes are common to the gridded data, so these will not be discussed. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 18-23, 43-50, 57-58

spot_index
    An arbitrary integer index for the sites. 

altitude
    Height of site above sea level. 

latitude, longitude
    Site positions are only provided in latitude and longitude,
    regardless of the projection used for the corresponding grid.
    These can be considered as relative the WGS84 or the World Geodetic System 1984 datum,
    although this is not explicit in the metadata. 

wmo_id
    For WMO sites, this is the numerical WMO identifier stored as a string; 

>     for other sites this is a set to ``NaN`` (at present, the formatting of this is not ideal, but will be changed to ensure that the numbers are right-justified and padded with zeros in the next release). 

Reviewer 2: I assume this is just out of date? These are 5-character strings, zero-padded ID numbers. The non WMO sites are set to the string "None" as iris cannot save NaN.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> 

Reviewer 2: Needs a section on the `met_office_site_id`. It is worth highlighting here that the `met_office_site_id` name is user configurable, such that it can be changed for different institutions / indices. It is a zero-padded string.

Author: Added. Thanks.

These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

As this is deterministic, there is no dimension and coordinate variable for 
``threshold`` or ``percentile``. 

There are two new coordinate variables.

.. literalinclude:: wx_code_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 11-24

weather_code
    Is the integer code used to represent the weather type in the main variable data. 

weather_code_meaning
    Provides corresponding short descriptions of each weather type in the weather_code list. 

Wind direction
**************

At present, probabilities and percentiles are not offered for wind direction, 
just a single set of deterministic values, which are a mean across realizations
(ensemble members) from a single model. 
For this reason, some of the metadata are slightly different 
from the nearest equivalent percentiles. 
These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

.. note::

    In future, we expect to at least be able to generate 
    percentiles of wind direction.

The global attribute ``mosg__model_configuration`` is always a single model 

> (for the Met Office ``uk_ens`` or ``gl_ens`` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(for the Met Office ``uk_ens`` or ``gl_ens``)
```

For gridded data only, the ``title`` only identifies the single model used
(for the Met Office, this would be either
``MOGREPS-UK Model Forecast on UK 2 km Standard Grid`` or 

> ``MOGREPS-G Model Forecast on UK 2 km Standard Grid``),

Reviewer 2: These are out of date. The titles now include the `Post-processed` prefix to avoid issues with visual weather distinguishing between the raw model output and the IMPROVER products. We have done processing here, so the title is not unreasonably applied.

Author: Thanks. It's in my sample data, but forgot about the change.

rather than referring to the IMPROVER Blend
(although the spot data is still labelled as IMPROVER,
as a site extraction has taken place). 

As this is mean, there is no dimension and coordinate variable for 
``threshold`` or ``percentile``. 

The main variable has a ``cell_methods`` attribute, set to
``realization: mean``.

> At present, there is no ``blend_time`` coordinate variable, 
> so, st present, an idea of the time at which the data was generated 
> can be obtained from the ``forecast_reference_time``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At present there is no ``blend_time`` coordinate variable.
For now an idea of the time at which the data was generated 
can be obtained from the ``forecast_reference_time``
```

 * Conformance to the CF Metadata Conventions, building on this where necessary
 * Clear purpose, with just enough metadata to describe the data sufficiently
 * Nothing misleading or unnecessarily restrictive for wide usage
 * (Ideally) support for referencing more detailed external documentation

Looking at an example
---------------------

The easiest way to explain the IMPROVER metadata from a user perspective
is to dive straight in and look at an actual example.
For this purpose, we will consider
gridded probabilities for a 12-hour maximum temperature 
exceeding a range of thresholds
on an extended UK domain generated from Met Office model data. 

There are two common views of the metadata:

* How the ncdump utility would display the netCDF file metadata 
* How iris would display the cube

We will mainly focus on the file view here as the default output
provides a fuller view
(although iris can be used to fully explore the metadata).

Note that to aid readability, in both cases
``probability_of_air_temperature_above_threshold`` 
has been shortened to ``prob_temp12m``
and for the ncdump output trailing semicolons have also been removed
and the text for the global attribute

> ``mosg__model_run`` has line breaks inserted.

Author: Removed section

coordinates
    This lists the scalar coordinates,
    i.e. those that do not appear as dimensions of the main variable. 

Coordinate variables
********************

In this example, there 8 coordinate variables.
Three that appear as dimensions on the variable 
and 5 scalar coordinates listed in the coordinates attribute
(both highlighted in the code snippet below)

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 8-14
    :emphasize-lines: 1, 7

In summary these are:

* threshold 
* projection_y_coordinate 
* projection_x_coordinate 
* blend_time
* forecast_period 
* forecast_reference_time 
* height 
* time 

.. warning::

    ``forecast_period`` and ``forecast_reference_time`` 
    are deprecated and will be dropped in the future.
    There more discussion on this in the sections below.

Probability threshold coordinate variable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the main variable in this example is a probability of exceeding a threshold, 
a further dimensional coordinate variable is required to allow the data 
to be fully interpreted.
This holds the set of thresholds for the probabilities,

> which in this case are a set of 12-hour maxiumum temperature values.

Author: Corrected.

    namespace to show that it is seperate from the 
    `CF Metadata Conventions`_ attributes.
    It is used to indicate the nature of the threshold inequality,
    and takes one of the four values:

    * ``greater_than`` 
    * ``greater_than_or_equal_to``
    * ``less_than`` 
    * ``less_than_or_equal_to`` 

Time coordinate variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

At present, most parameters have two time coordinate variables, 
``time`` and ``blend_time``, 
with a further variable providing the bounds of the time step for parameters 
where this information is required.

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 40-43, 59-64

time
    The time at which the parameter value is valid.

blend_time
    Has been added to indicate when the data was processed (blended)
    to generate this forecast, and can be used to indicate how 'fresh'
    the data is. 
    (For the Met Office continually updating dataset, 
    the ``blend_time`` will not be the same for all validity times,
    as forecasts in the near future are updated more frequently).
    Strictly, as ``blend_time`` is not part of the `CF Metadata Conventions`_

>     it should arguable include a 'namespace element' such as ``mosg__``

Author: Corrected.

    so the use of ``blend_time`` is more appropriate.

forecast_period
    This usually represent the interval between the ``forecast_reference_time``
    and the validity time (``time``), but as stated above,
    there is no unique ``forecast_reference_time``, and forecasts valid at
    different times may have a different ``blend_time``, so at best
    ``forecast_period`` is unhelpful, at worst it is confusing.

The time coordinate variables share a common set of attributes:

standard_name / long_name
    A descriptive name, either from the `CF Standard Name`_ list 
    (e.g. ``time``) or  
    a non-standard ``long_name`` (e.g. ``blend_time``)

units
    Units of measure for the quantity.
    As these are usually in seconds relative to midnight on 1st January 1970,
    so usually some formatting is required to be human-readable. 

calendar
    Indicates that a Gregorian (standard) calendar is used. 

bounds
    Just a pointer to the variable defining the start and end of the time period,
    if it is present. 

Horizontal coordinate variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Two horizontal coordinate variables, 
here projection_y_coordinate and projection_x_coordinate

> (but would be latitude and longitude for an equi-rectangular 

Author: I've changed both instances to "equirectangular" as most sources don't capitalise the name. Nor indeed do they for the other projection names, with the exception of where they include the name of a person, so I've also updated the other projection reference to "Lambert azimuthal equal area".

used by the Met Office for the UK domain,
but a Latitude-Longitude (strictly, Equirectangular) projection
is usually used for the global domain.
The set of attributes will vary depending on map projection,
so to get the exact meanings, it is best to look at 
“Appendix F: Grid Mappings” in the `CF Metadata Conventions`_

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_prob_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 15-23

Other forms of IMPROVER data
----------------------------

Percentiles
***********
The example explored so far in the document describes the metadata
for probabilities of exceeding a threshold, 
but IMPROVER can also generate forecasts as a set of percentiles, 
for which the metadata will differ slightly. 
These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

Dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^

The ``threshold`` dimension is replaced by ``percentile`` dimension

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_perc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 2-6
    :emphasize-lines: 2
 
percentile
    The dimension for the coordinate describing the percentile values. 

Main percentile variable 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In the example here, the main variable is a 12 hour maxiumum temperature,

Author: Corrected

> but representing the nth percentile of the temperature forecast probability distribution

Author: Changed.

previously described in detail, except: 

standard_name
    Can be used rather than a ``long_name``, as ``air_temperature``
    exists as a descriptive name in the `CF Standard Name`_ list. 

cell_methods
    Used to describe statistical processing applied to the quantity
    no longer requires the additional non-standardized part, 
    ``(comment: of air_temperature)``, 
    as they now refer to the main variable that is a maximum temperature over 12 hours. 

Percentile coordinate variable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As the main variable provides the air temperature at a set of percentiles,
a further dimensional coordinate variable is required to allow the data to be 
fully interpreted. This holds the set of percentile values. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_perc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 24-26, 72-74

The variable attributes are:

long_name
   ``percentile`` which is used for all IMPROVER percentile variables. 
   It is not in the `CF Standard Name`_ list.

units
    The units here are a percentage. 

Spot data 
*********

Broadly, the spot data parallels the form of the gridded data, 
both probabilities and percentiles are produced,

> but there are some notable differences because of the nature of data.

Author: added in "the"

These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

Global attributes 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Only the title is different for the spot data. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 60-66
    :emphasize-lines: 6

Dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^

The dimensions for the horizontal coordinate variables have been replaced by
a dimension for an index coordinate for the sites, 
and a dimension for the WMO identifier string length has been added. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_spotperc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4
    :lines: 2-7

spot_index
    The dimension for the index for the set of sites. 

string5 / string8
    Just constants used to dimension the character length of the string variable
    holding zero padded WMO identifier and Met Office identifiers, respectively.

.. how tied to the code are these identifiers, as they may not be appropiate

>     for other users?

Author: Done

weather_code_meaning
    Provides corresponding short descriptions of each weather type in the weather_code list. 

Wind direction
**************

At present, probabilities and percentiles are not offered for wind direction, 
just a single set of deterministic values, which are a mean across realizations
(ensemble members) from a single model. 
For this reason, some of the metadata are slightly different 
from the nearest equivalent percentiles. 
These difference are described below, but the full ncdump listing
is shown in an appendix.

.. note::

    In future, we expect to at least be able to generate 
    percentiles of wind direction.

The global attribute ``mosg__model_configuration`` is always a single model 
(for the Met Office ``uk_ens`` or ``gl_ens``)

For gridded data only, the ``title`` only identifies the single model used
(for the Met Office, this would be either
``Post-processed MOGREPS-UK Model Forecast on UK 2 km Standard Grid`` or 
``Post-processed MOGREPS-G Model Forecast on UK 2 km Standard Grid``),
rather than referring to the IMPROVER Blend
(although the spot data is still labelled as IMPROVER,
as a site extraction has taken place). 

> As this is mean, there is no dimension and coordinate variable for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this is a mean, there is no dimension and coordinate variable for 
```

Author: Much as I wanted to leave this as "this is mean", I have changed it to the "a" in.

Main percentile variable 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the example here, the main variable is a 12 hour maximum temperature,
but representing the Nth percentile of the temperature forecast probability distribution
at each point. 

.. literalinclude:: temp12max_perc_ncdump.txt
    :tab-width: 4

>     :lines: 8-14s

Reviewer 2: I think this addition of a trailing `s` was a mistake.

Author: Indeed - probably CNTL S without the CNTL. Now corrected.
